Progress Report - January 2022 (#308)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jan-2022/index.md

Support was added to [allow devices with only an accelerometer present to act as motion devices](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7680).
While this means broader support, lacking a gyroscope means very poor results in motion, as some axis movements won’t be registered.

With the help of v1993, german77 [fixed the mapping of UDP controllers](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7682) (any device connected using the cemuhook protocol).
Motion now correctly automaps and manual mapping won’t reset the device in the input list.

In a separate PR, by request of v1993, german77 [added support for the Home and Touch buttons on UDP connections](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7807).

Some motion devices can input very precise values, if the threshold is too high, the motion values will be ignored.
[Reducing the threshold for gyro data](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7700) fixes this issue.

While playing `Mario Tennis Aces` in swing mode, motion could suddenly stop working.
This was because the update rate interval for motion data was set too high.
[Decreasing the motion update rate to 10ms restores functionality](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7707).

> Also related to motion emulation, the quality and sensitivity of the device can also affect gameplay. As a way to compensate, german77 introduced [an option configure the gyro threshold](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7770), you can find it if you have a motion capable controller (in the example, dual Joy-Cons). Configured in `Emulation > Configure… > Controls > right click Motion > Set gyro threshold`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also related to motion emulation, the quality and sensitivity of the device can also affect gameplay. As a way to compensate, german77 introduced [an option to configure the gyro threshold](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7770), you can find it if you have a motion capable controller (in the example, dual Joy-Cons). Configured in `Emulation > Configure… > Controls > right click Motion > Set gyro threshold`.
```

We recently introduced controller UI navigation.
While comfortable, some users run external programs to translate controller input into keyboard and mouse input.
For them, [a toggle to disable controller navigation was added](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7769) in `Emulation > Configure… > Controls > Advanced > Controller Navigation`.

{{< imgs
	"./nav.png| Couch gamers will love this"
  >}}

By default, yuzu assumes that non-Nintendo Switch controllers, for example the Xbox controllers, will use rumble motors. These are cheaper and use an exponential amplitude curve for their rumble, making this kind of method incompatible for emulating HD Rumble.
The DS5 on the PlayStation 5, instead, uses more expensive linear actuators (and needs a linear amplitude curve), like the Pro Controller and Joy-Cons.
[With this change](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7784), german77 extended support to include the official PlayStation 5 controller, the DS5, which is capable of the required precision for HD Rumble.

## General changes and bugfixes

> TAS scripts can have errors in them, and it’s not quite ideal that an error like that could take down an entire yuzu session.
> german77 provides the necessary code to [add error handling to TAS scripts](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7687), preventing such crashes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAS scripts can sometimes have errors in them, resulting in yuzu encountering a crash.
german77 provides the necessary code to [add error handling to TAS scripts](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7687), preventing these crashes.
```

Windows has a nasty, hidden limitation that is the maximum open-file limit a program can use.
Some game mods can contain many, *many* files, going over the previous 4096 limit. Therefore, [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) [doubled the limit to 8192](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7690).

v1993 has been working on code cleaning using [PVS-Studio](https://pvs-studio.com/en/pvs-studio/), and the results have been great.
So far, errors were found and fixed in [four](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7727) [separate](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7728) [input](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7729) [related areas](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7730), [the shader recompiler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7731), and even [kernel emulation](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7732)!

Thanks v1993! Nothing beats cleaner code, especially if it solves out-of-bounds issues.

Morph [stubbed the `SetCpuOverclockEnabled` service](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7752) (you don’t need to overclock the host CPU on the fly when emulating).

> This allows `Gravity Rider Zero` to boot, but nothing is displayed on screen due to missing texture format support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows `Gravity Rider Zero` to boot, but nothing is yet displayed on screen due to missing texture format support.
```

And finally, german77 [implemented the 32-bit variant of the supervisor call (SVC) `SynchronizePreemptionState`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7821), making `Espgaluda II` playable.

{{< imgs
	"./esp.png| Espgaluda II"
  >}}

Meanwhile, [liushuyu](https://github.com/liushuyu) updated the dynarmic external submodule, providing [optimizations and also fixing compile errors](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7679) caused by an update of another external, the `fmt` library — used to format text in yuzu's log and interface.

german77 also added new [hotkeys that allow users to manipulate the volume](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7716) of the application directly with the gamepad, a feature that will surely come in handy to the people who enjoy yuzu from the comfort of their couch.

> By default, `Home + Right D-Pad` will mute the application, while `Home + D-pad Down` will lower the volume, and  `Home + D-pad Up` will increase it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, `Home + D-Pad Right ` will mute the application, while `Home + D-Pad Down` will lower the volume, and  `Home + D-Pad Up` will increase it.
```

> (Users are free to change these through the configuration menu `Emulation > Configure > Hotkeys`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users are free to change these mappings through the configuration menu `Emulation > Configure > Hotkeys`.
```

As a follow-up, [v1993](https://github.com/v1993) also made changes so that the colourful scheme (i.e. dark or light) used for the first time [depends on the system-wide theme](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7755) in *NIX systems.

{{< imgs
	"./theme.png| Default by popular demand"
  >}}

Naturally, users can still change the theme through the configuration settings, if so desired.

## Input changes

[german77](https://github.com/german77) has been *specially* busy this month, so there’s quite a bit to cover in this section.

Users reported that the game `パワプロクンポケットR` and other games of the Power Pocket saga crashed in-game.
This is caused by the `SetNpadAnalogStickUseCenterClamp` service being able to initialise the applet_resource subsystem even if it wasn’t initialised before.
[Emulating this behaviour solves the issue and makes some game modes playable](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7726). 
Some game modes show that yuzu lacks support for some vertex formats, causing crashes.

{{< imgs
	"./power.png| パワプロクンポケットR"
  >}}

> [Only supported controller types will be shown in the applet now](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7663).
> This depends on what each game informs as compatible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
yuzu will now [only display the currently supported controller types in the applet](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7663), depending on what each game reports as compatible.
```

> `Fullkey` is the codename used by Nintendo to refer to a generic type of controller that informs itself as a Pro Controller if you connect an “unsupported” gamepad, this can refer to the GameCube, NES, SNES, N64 and Sega Genesis controllers.
> In case of problems, the console fallbacks those types to a Pro Controller, german77 [added this functionality to yuzu too](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7664).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Fullkey` is the codename used by Nintendo to refer to a generic type of controller that reports itself as a Pro Controller if you connect an “unsupported” gamepad. This can refer to the GameCube, NES, SNES, N64 and Sega Genesis controllers.
In case of problems, the console falls back to reporting a Pro Controller for those types of controllers. german77 [added this functionality to yuzu as well](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7664).
```

> [Support was added to allow devices with only an accelerometer present to act as motion devices](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7680).
> While this means broader support, lacking a gyroscope means very poor results in motion, as some axis movements won’t be registered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support was added to [allow devices with only an accelerometer present to act as motion devices](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7680).
While this means broader support, lacking a gyroscope means very poor results in motion, as some axis movements won’t be registered.
```

With the help of v1993, german77 [fixed the mapping of UDP controllers](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7682) (any device connected using the cemuhook protocol).
Motion now correctly automaps and manual mapping won’t reset the device in the input list.

In a separate PR, by request of v1993, german77 [added support for the Home and Touch buttons on UDP connections](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7807).

Some motion devices can input very precise values, if the threshold is too high, the motion values will be ignored.
[Reducing the threshold for gyro data](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7700) fixes this issue.

While playing `Mario Tennis Aces` in swing mode, motion could suddenly stop working.

> This was caused because the update rate interval for motion data was set too high.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was because the update rate interval for motion data was set too high.
```

[Decreasing the motion update rate to 10ms restores functionality](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7707).

> Also related to motion emulation, the quality of the device can also affect gameplay, as a way to compensate, german77 introduced [an option configure the gyro threshold](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7770), you can find it if you have a motion capable controller (in the example, dual Joy-Cons) set in `Emulation > Configure… > Controls > right click Motion > Set gyro threshold`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also related to motion emulation, the quality and sensitivity of the device can also affect gameplay. As a way to compensate, german77 introduced [an option configure the gyro threshold](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7770), you can find it if you have a motion capable controller (in the example, dual Joy-Cons). Configured in `Emulation > Configure… > Controls > right click Motion > Set gyro threshold`.
```

{{< imgs
	"./gyro.png| Right clicking!"
  >}}

> Accessing 2-player mode in `Pokémon Let’s Go Eevee & Pikachu` requires performing a shake motion.
> The emulated shake on the keyboard was too weak to be registered by the game, so [increasing its “force”](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7710) shakes things up to allow local multiplayer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessing 2-player mode in `Pokémon: Let’s Go Eevee & Pikachu` requires performing a shake motion.
The emulated shake on the keyboard was too weak to be registered by the game, so [increasing its “force”](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7710) shakes things up to allow local multiplayer.
```

One of the features missing with the release of `Project Kraken`, the input rewrite, was mouse motion support.
[German77 reintroduced support for it](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7725), now using the mouse wheel as input for the Z-axis.

> Also, mouse buttons got their proper names when being mapped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, mouse buttons get their proper names when being mapped.
```

Another feature that somehow missed the memo [was stick modifiers for keyboard input](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7760), holding a mapped key to move an analog stick with a reduced limit.
For example, with default keyboard mappings, if you hold shift, the left analog stick will move only up to 50% of its range, allowing keyboard users to walk.

We recently introduced controller UI navigation.
While comfortable, some users run external programs to translate controller input into keyboard and mouse input.
For them, [a toggle to disable controller navigation was added](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7769) in `Emulation > Configure… > Controls > Advanced > Controller Navigation`.

{{< imgs
	"./nav.png| Couch gamers will love this"
  >}}

> By default yuzu assumes that non Nintendo Switch controllers, like for example the Xbox controllers, will use rumble motors, which are cheaper, and use an exponential amplitude curve for their rumble, making this kind of method incompatible for emulating HD Rumble.
> The DS5 on the Playstation 5 instead uses more expensive linear actuators (and needs a linear amplitude curve), like the Pro Controller and Joy-Cons.
> [With this change](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7784) german77 extended support to include the official Playstation 5 controller, the DS5, which is capable of the required precision for HD Rumble.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, yuzu assumes that non-Nintendo Switch controllers, for example the Xbox controllers, will use rumble motors. These are cheaper and use an exponential amplitude curve for their rumble, making this kind of method incompatible for emulating HD Rumble.
The DS5 on the PlayStation 5, instead, uses more expensive linear actuators (and needs a linear amplitude curve), like the Pro Controller and Joy-Cons.
[With this change](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7784), german77 extended support to include the official PlayStation 5 controller, the DS5, which is capable of the required precision for HD Rumble.
```

## General changes and bugfixes

> TAS scripts can have errors in them, and it’s not good that a mistake like that could take down the whole yuzu session.
> german77 provides the necessary code to [add error handling to TAS scripts](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7687), preventing such crashes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAS scripts can have errors in them, and it’s not quite ideal that an error like that could take down an entire yuzu session.
german77 provides the necessary code to [add error handling to TAS scripts](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7687), preventing such crashes.
```

> Windows has a nasty hidden limitation in the maximum open file limit a program can use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Windows has a nasty, hidden limitation that is the maximum open-file limit a program can use.
```

> Some game mods can contain many *many* files, going over the previous 4096 limit, so [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) [increased the limit to 8192](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7690).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some game mods can contain many, *many* files, going over the previous 4096 limit. Therefore, [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) [doubled the limit to 8192](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7690).
```

> v1993 has been working on code cleaning using [PVS-Studio](https://pvs-studio.com/en/pvs-studio/), and the results have been great.
> So far errors were found and fixed on [four](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7727) [separate](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7728) [input](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7729) [related areas](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7730), [the shader recompiler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7731) and even [kernel emulation](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7732)!
> 
> Thanks v1993, nothing beats cleaner code, especially if it solves out of bounds issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
v1993 has been working on code cleaning using [PVS-Studio](https://pvs-studio.com/en/pvs-studio/), and the results have been great.
So far, errors were found and fixed in [four](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7727) [separate](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7728) [input](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7729) [related areas](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7730), [the shader recompiler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7731), and even [kernel emulation](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7732)!

Thanks v1993! Nothing beats cleaner code, especially if it solves out-of-bounds issues.
```

Morph [stubbed the `SetCpuOverclockEnabled` service](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7752) (you don’t need to overclock the host CPU on the fly when emulating).
This allows `Gravity Rider Zero` to boot, but nothing is displayed on screen due to missing texture format support.

And finally, german77 [implemented the 32-bit variant of the supervisor call (SVC) `SynchronizePreemptionState`](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7821), making `Espgaluda II` playable.

{{< imgs
	"./esp.png| Espgaluda II"
  >}}

> Meanwhile, [liushuyu](https://github.com/liushuyu) updated the dynarmic external, bringing [optimizations and also fixing compile errors](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7679) caused by an update of another external, the `fmt` library — used to format text in yuzu's log and interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meanwhile, [liushuyu](https://github.com/liushuyu) updated the dynarmic external submodule, providing [optimizations and also fixing compile errors](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7679) caused by an update of another external, the `fmt` library — used to format text in yuzu's log and interface.
```

> german77 also added new [hotkeys that allow users to manipulate the volume](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7716) of the application directly with the gamepad, a feature that will surely come handy to the people who enjoy yuzu from the comfort of their couch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
german77 also added new [hotkeys that allow users to manipulate the volume](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/7716) of the application directly with the gamepad, a feature that will surely come in handy to the people who enjoy yuzu from the comfort of their couch.
```

By default, `Home + Right D-Pad` will mute the application, while `Home + D-pad Down` will lower the volume, and  `Home + D-pad Up` will increase it.
(Users are free to change these through the configuration menu `Emulation > Configure > Hotkeys`).

{{< imgs
	"./hotkeys.png| The more the merrier!"
  >}}

While working on this change, german77 noticed the equation used to transform from percentage values to "loudness" (i.e. output power) was too aggressive below the 70% mark, making the volume extremely soft in this range.
Thus, he decided to modify the formula, so that the transformation is smoother throughout the full range of percentage values.

{{< imgs
	"./volume.png| Old is in red and new is in green. Look at those curves!"
  >}}

## Future changes

Progress continues smoothly on our projects in development. 

> For example german77 is having fun with some heavily requested features.
> Blinkhawk managed to complete one of the top secret projects [Rodrigo](https://github.com/reinuseslisp) left unfinished before *turning green*, `Host Conditional Rendering`,  expect to hear more of it in future `Project Y.F.C.` news.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, german77 is having fun with some heavily requested features.
Blinkhawk managed to complete one of the top secret projects [Rodrigo](https://github.com/reinuseslisp) left unfinished before *turning green*, `Host Conditional Rendering`. Expect to hear more of it in future `Project Y.F.C.` news.
```

> A small leak of recent internal testing, `Marvel Ultimate Alliance 3: The Black Order` jumped from 19 to 51 FPS on Vulkan, and your enemy's ink in `Splatoon 2` works correctly on AMD GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now for a small leak of some recent internal testing: `Marvel Ultimate Alliance 3: The Black Order` jumped from 19 to 51 FPS on Vulkan, and your enemy's ink in `Splatoon 2` works correctly on AMD GPUs.
```
